# The Institutional Logic of the Welfare State: Introductory Laws and Current Attitudes toward the State’s Role in Social Protection in 46 Countries

Breznau, Nate. 2023. “Institutional Trajectories of the Welfare State: Returns from Social Policy Inception to Modern Public Opinion.” Pp. 185–206 in A Research Agenda for Public Attitudes to Welfare, edited by F. Roosma and T. Laenen. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

[Link to Book Chapter](https://www.elgaronline.com/edcollchap/book/9781800887411/book-part-9781800887411-15.xml) <br>
[Link to Preprint (Working Paper)](https://osf.io/preprints/socarxiv/mehsq) <br>
Theories of historical and sociological institutions suggest that political and policy-defining events early in nation state trajectories create norms and preferences among a society that are somewhat stable over long periods of time. These norms are often part of theories describing welfare state institutions as path dependent because they are self-reinforcing. I test this proposition using the timing of basic welfare state laws and comprehensive social insurance laws (between 1884 and 1970, available in the Global Work-Injury Database v1.0) across 46 countries with recently available survey data regarding public preferences for government provision of social welfare (between 1990 and 2019 available in two modules of the International Social Survey Program). Many decades of welfare state research offer rich explanations for cross-national and cross-temporal variation in public preferences for government socio-economic intervention. After adjusting for some key claims proposed in this literature, I aim to identify whether earlier and faster trajectories to social insurance predict greater support of a national welfare state, all else equal. In doing so, I am testing claims of an institutional logic to welfare state attitudes, or what some refer to as the ‘regime hypothesis’.
